LATEEF ADEBAYO GANIYU, J.C.A. (Delivering the Leading Judgment): The judgment of the National Industrial Court of Nigeria, Akure Judicial Division, delivered on 3rd day of June, 2014, coram: A.N. Ubaka J birthed the instant appeal, wherein the trial Court inter alia held thus:
"It therefore follows that the claims of the claimant in the instant case are caught up by Section 2(a) of Public Officers Protection Act. In sum total the action of the claimant on the 6th January, 2010 is statute barred having been commenced more than three months after the course of action arose in 2005. The case is accordingly fails and is hereby dismissed. I make no order as to cost."

Disenchanted by the afore-quoted decision of the trial Court, the Appellant filed his Amended Notice of Appeal on 23/11/2020.
​
This appeal came up for hearing on 29/4/2024. I.O.I. Adebayo Esq., held the brief of Rowland Otaru, SAN for the Respondent while the Appellant who was not represented in Court on that day was served through his learned counsel via SMS on 25/4/2024 vide mobile telephone numbers 08028900120 & 08092865242 but despite the aforesaid service, neither the


1

Appellant nor his learned counsel appeared before this Court on 29/4/2024 when this appeal came up for hearing. Hence, this Court on the application of the Respondent's counsel on record and by virtue of the provision of Order 19 Rule 9(4) of the Rules of this Court, deemed that the Appellant's brief has been argued.

BRIEF STATEMENT OF FACTS
The Appellant in this appeal was an employee of the Respondent who joined the service of the Respondent as Officer IV (Accounts) in 1997 vide letter of offer of appointment with reference No. NEPA/26/0001/1769/97 and between 1997 and 2005 rose to the rank of Officer Il marketing grade level 08 in the Respondent's company.

According to the Appellant, upon assumption of duty, he was posted to Akenzua District of the Respondent under the supervision of the Commercial ​Manager of Akenzua District, one Mr. L.O. Oshodi who requested him to be giving to him, daily gratification in the sum of N3,000.00 from all PHCN disconnection carried out on customers by the Appellant, the request that the Appellant considered to be unwholesome to him. Hence, the resolve by Mr. L.O. Oshodi to frustrate him at their place of work



2

because according to the Appellant, the request is normal thing among the said Mr. L.O. Oshodi and his subordinates who had previously served under him.

Therefore, friction ensued between the appellant and the said Mr. L.O. Oshod, who used his superior position to that of the Appellant to cause a query dated 4th of April, 2005 on the allegation of non-delivery of eight (8 No) MD Bills and fraudulently forging signatures of customers to be served on the Appellant when he reported to duty on 6th April, 2005. Again, on 1/6/2015, another query was issued to the Appellant on allegations of general misconduct, fraudulent practices and illegal connection of electricity supply which prompted the lodging of a petition by one Mrs. Bose Ayu. Furthermore, the Appellant contended that on 4/7/2005 he was issued with an audit query bothering on allegation of crime which he responded to on 10/8/2005.

Besides, the Appellant averred that he wrote a letter to the Corporate Headquarters, Abuja, on his purported dismissal which was acknowledged by the Respondent and the Appellant's letter was referred to the Chief Executive Officer, Benin Electricity Distribution Company for


3

necessary action on the allegation raised in the said petition which was yet to be reinvestigated till date.

The Appellant contended that his dismissal carried out by Benin Zonal Office runs contrary to the rules and regulations guiding his conditions of service with the Respondent and was also denied his fundamental right to fair hearing.

Furthermore, the Appellant avers that on the 11th of July, 2007, through his solicitor, he caused to be issued and served a statutory pre-action notice of one month of intention to commence legal action against the Respondent and that upon receipt of the pre-action notice, the Respondent invited the Appellant for discussion which indeed took place and as a result of the discussion, the Appellant halted any plan to take action thereafter but the Respondent failed to take any step towards ameliorating the situation. Hence, the action taken before the lower Court to seek for the under-mentioned reliefs, namely:
1. That the management of Power Holding Company of Nigeria did not follow due process as well as the laid down procedure before orally dismissing him from the Power Holding Company of Nigeria, particularly



4

with the management's refusal to consider the letter from its corporate headquarters in Abuja dated 19/9/06 wherein the management was directed to thoroughly re-investigate the allegation raised by the Appellant.
2. A declaration that the oral dismissal of the Appellant by the Respondent without following the laid down procedure is a violation of the strictly regulated statutory rules and procedures laid down for dismissing an employee in an employment that is protected by statute and that same is unlawful, null and void.
3. The Plaintiff's (i.e. the Appellant) further claim is for his reinstatement into the service of Power Holding Company of Nigeria where he worked for nine years until 2005 when he was orally dismissed due to false allegation made against him, even when no letter of dismissal was sent to him.
4. An order of Court mandating the defendant to re-instate the plaintiff to his position and restore all his right, privileges, benefits and entitlements since 2005 when plaintiff was unlawfully dismissed until he is re-instated.
​
On the other hand, the Respondent on her own part as could be gleaned from her statement of defence before



5

the lower Court which is contained at page 50 - 53 of the record of appeal inter alia stated that the Appellant was an employee of the Respondent between 14th of July, 1997 till September, 2005 and that the Appellant's employment with the Respondent was based on an ordinary master and servant relation which was regulated by the rules and regulations guiding the conditions of service of the Respondent, 1998 edition.

According to the Respondent, it forms part of the schedule of duties of the Appellant to distribute maximum demand (MD) bills to its esteemed customers in the Akenzua District and also to dispatch records to that effect. The Respondent stated further that sometime in March 2005, some of its esteemed customers from the aforesaid business district lodged complaint against the Appellant that he did not make available to them their bills before embarking on disconnecting them from power supply whereas the Appellant's dispatch note indicated that the bills were dispatched and recipients of same signed for it.

​Whereas on enquiry from the Appellant's office, it was discovered that the bills had not been distributed and non- distribution of bills



6

under the Respondent's regulation and/or conditions of service attracts dismissal from the Respondent's service. Hence, the issuance and service of four (4) different queries on the Appellant which he responded to but the responses were found unsatisfactory to the Respondent.

Based on the events that led to the issuance and service of queries on the Appellant, the Respondent constituted a disciplinary committee/panel which was saddled with the responsibility of investigating the alleged case of non-distribution of 333 numbers of MD Bills (in the month of March, 2005), forging of customers' signature and general misconduct against the plaintiff which was the basis of the queries served on him.

The Respondent went further to assert that the committee constituted in the course of investigating the aforesaid allegations levelled against the Appellant observed the rules of fair hearing and natural justice by affording the Appellant the opportunity to cross-examine his boss at the time - Mr. Lucky Oshodi and upon conclusion of the Committees' assignment, it made certain recommendations to the Respondent.
​
Furthermore, Respondent contended that Benin



7

Zonal office is the one that employed the Appellant and has authority to terminate and/or dismiss him from its employment in accordance with the conditions of service of the Respondent.

The Respondent averred that it followed the laid down rules and regulations governing the conditions of service in interdicting and dismissing the Appellant and that save the fact that the Appellant's counsel served on the Respondent a pre-action notice, it did not at any time invite the Appellant for any discussion.

In addition, the Respondent contended that the appellant sequel to the service of pre-action notice on it, has since been writing petitions and protest letters against the Respondent and had earlier instituted an action at the State High Court Benin in Suit No. B/334/08 between Godwin E. Okhilua vs. Power Holding Company of Nigeria which was struck out on October 2nd, 2008.

Moreover, the Respondent asserted that it did not dismiss the Appellant orally as he was dismissed vide letter of dismissal sent to him in September 2005.
​
Finally, the Respondent contended that the Appellant was not entitled to the reliefs sought by him.


8

SUBMISSION BY THE LEARNED COUNSEL
In compliance with the extant Rules of this Court, both parties filed and exchanged their respective Brief of Arguments. The Appellant in his Brief of Argument filed on 7/1/2021 but deemed as properly filed and served on 24/1/2024 formulated three issues for the determination of this appeal as follow:
"ISSUE ONE
Whether the learned trial Judge did not err and misdirect himself in law when he gave judgment against the weight of evidence put before him. (Distilled from ground one of the grounds of appeal).
ISSUE TWO
Whether the learned trial Judge did not err and misdirect himself in law when he held that the letter from the Respondent's corporate headquarters did not open the limitation period, if any. (Distilled from ground two of the ground of appeal).
ISSUE THREE
Whether the learned trial Judge did not misdirect himself in law when he held that Claimant/Appellant pleaded that he was dismissed in 2005."

In reaction to the Appellant's Brief of Argument, the Respondent filed notice of preliminary objection on 6/6/2023 praying this Court as follows:
"The Respondent herein


9

shall at the hearing raise by way of preliminary objection to the Appellant's appeal, vide notice of preliminary objection filed before this Honourable Court. The notice of preliminary objection states as follows:-
The Respondent shall at the threshold of the hearing of this appeal raise by way of preliminary objection that the Appellant's Amended Notice of Appeal is incompetent and that this Honourable Court has no vires or jurisdiction to hear and/or determine the Appellant's appeal as it is presented or filed before this Honourable Court."
GROUNDS FOR THE OBJECTION
i. "That the name of the appellant's counsel as contained in the Appellant's Notice of Appeal dated the 23rd day of November, 2020 titled "AMENDED NOTICE OF APPEAL" is not competent.
ii. That the Respondent is not a juristic personality as contained in the Appellant's Writ of Summons and on the amended Notice of Appeal dated the 23rd day of November, 2020.

Besides, the Respondent filed her Brief of Argument on 6/6/2023 which was deemed as properly filed and served on 24/1/2024 wherein she incorporated her argument of the preliminary objection at page 2, paragraph 2.0



10

to 3.6 at page 4 into the Brief of Argument.

Suffice it to say that the law is settled that when a preliminary objection is raised against the hearing of an appeal, such preliminary objection must be accorded priority over the hearing of the substantive appeal. See Okorocha V. UBA PLC (2018) LPELR - 45122 (SC), where it was held that:-
"It is settled law, that preliminary objection where raised by a party should firstly be determined before the determination of the substantive appeal if the need to do so arises" per Sanusi, JSC (p. 13, paras E - F).

Therefore, the Respondent's preliminary objection will now be considered.
​
Again, it is to be placed on record that the Appellant did not react to the Respondent's preliminary objection before this Court which presupposes that the Appellant has admitted all the issues raised therein. However, in view of the fact that the preliminary objection was premised on points of law simpliciter without accompanying same with any affidavit deposing to facts in support of same, I am of settled view my noble Lords, that this Court can safely entertain the preliminary objection and determine same one way or the



11

other. See Nigerian Navy & Ors. V. Garrick (2005) LPELR - 7555 (CA) where it was held that:-
"The Appellant has not filed any reply brief to the preliminary objection raised by the Respondent both in his notice of preliminary objection and in his brief. Where an Appellant fails to respond to a notice of preliminary objection to his appeal, he is deemed to have admitted all the issues raised and canvassed in the preliminary objection. See Goji v. Ewete (supra). Ordinarily, this would mean that the Appellants have nothing to offer in answer to the preliminary objection in this appeal and I would have validly determined the preliminary objection on this score alone and dispose of this appeal. However, I feel obliged and indeed obligated to carefully consider the issues raised in the preliminary objection because of some observations I have made." Per Omokri, JCA (p. 7, paras B - F).
​
Therefore, the Respondent's preliminary objection will now be considered. It is pertinent to place it on record that the gist of the Respondent's preliminary objection is that the Appellant's Amended Notice of Appeal is incompetent on the ground that the Appellant's



12

Amended Notice of Appeal was signed on behalf of the Appellant's counsel law firm - JOHN OGHENEJOBO & CO. by F.T. ODEBATA Esq.

Thus, the Appellant contended that the Appellant's amended Notice of Appeal which is the originating process having been signed by a law firm, is incompetent and consequently, this Court lacks jurisdiction to entertain the appeal.

Learned counsel to the Respondent in his argument of the preliminary objection submitted that JOHN E. OGHENEJOBO on whose behalf the Appellant's Amended Notice of Appeal was signed is not the counsel called to the Nigerian Bar as couched in the Amended Notice of Appeal. See Onward V. Olam Nig. Ltd. (2010) FWLR (Pt. 531) page 1503, Clev Josh Ltd. V. Tokimi (2008) 13 NWLR (Pt. 1104) page 422. Also, Okafor V. Nweke (2007) 10 NWLR (Pt. 1043) 521.

Besides, learned counsel to the Respondent submitted that the Respondent sued by the Appellant - "POWER HOLDING COMPANY OF NIGERIA (BENIN ELECTRICITY DISTRIBUTION COMPANY)" is not a juristic personality. See Idanre Local Government V. Governor of Ondo State (2010) 14 NWLR (pt. 1214) page 509. That being the case, learned counsel urged this Court to strike out or



13

dismiss the appeal for being incompetent.

As earlier mentioned in this judgment, the Appellant did not file a reply brief to the appellant's Notice of Preliminary Objection which implies that the Appellant had agreed to the issues raised in the preliminary objection by the Respondent. See Nigerian Navy & Ors. V. Garrick (supra).

Now, with respect to the Respondent's preliminary objection, it could be gleaned from the same that the Respondent's preliminary objection is premised on two grounds, namely;
i. That the originating process (i.e. the Appellant's Amended Notice of Appeal) is incompetent, same having been signed for and on behalf of the law firm of JOHN E. OGHENEJOBO & CO. which is not counsel that was called to the Nigerian Bar.
ii. The Respondent Power Holding Company of Nigeria (Benin Electricity Distribution Company) is not a juristic person.
​
However, with reference to the instant appeal in which the subsisting originating process is the Amended Notice of Appeal filed on 23/11/2020, signed by F. T. Odebata, Esq. Barrister and solicitor of the Supreme Court of Nigeria with enrolment No. SCN045894 for the law firm of



14

John E. Oghenejobo & Co., to my calm mind, same is distinguishable from the originating process in which the name of the law firm is inscribed on it as the author with the signature of an unidentified person appended on it which is the occurrence in the cases of:
1. OLU ODE OKPE V. FAN MILK PLC & ANOR. (2016) LPELR- 42562 (SC). Per AKA'AHS, JSC at page 47-48, paras. E.
2.YONGO & ORS. V. HANONGON & ORS. (2022) LPELR-(SC) and O'BAU ENGINEERING LTD V. ALMASOL (NIG.) LTD (2022) LPELR-57985 (SC) where it was held that:
"The law is settled beyond per adventure that the practice of law in Nigeria is the exclusive preserve of practitioners that have formally qualified to practice law in the country and by the provisions of Sections 2(1)and 24 of the Legal Practitioners Act, these are the persons whose names are listed on the Roll of Barristers and Solicitors in this Court. This Court has, in interpreting the provisions of Sections 2(1) and 24 of the Legal Practitioners Act in a long line of cases, stated and reiterated this fact and has opined that since the practice of law includes the drafting and signing of Court processes, only the



15

persons so listed on the Roll of Barristers and Solicitors can sign Court processes for filing in our Courts, and that the only exception is where processes are signed by a litigant who chooses to represent himself. Thus, the law is that all Court processes signed in the name of a law firm without specifically stating thereon the name of the individual Legal Practitioner who appended the signature on behalf of the law firm are null and void because a law firm is not one of the persons listed on the Roll of Barristers and Solicitors in Nigeria. See: Okafor Vs Nweke (2007) 10 NWLR (Pt 1043) 521, Oketade vs Adewunmi (2010) 8 NWLR (Pt 1195) 63, SLB Consortium Ltd vs NNPC (2011) 9 NWLR (Pt 1252) 317, Braithwaite vs Skye Bank Plc (2013) 5 NVVLR (Pt 1346) 1, First Bank of Nigeria Vs Maiwada & Ors (2013) 5 NWLR (Pt 1348) 444."
Per ABOKI, JSC (Pp. 10-11, Para. E-E).
Similarly, in Ojikutu & Ors. V. Kuti & Ors. (2021) LPELR-56231 (SC) where it was held that:-
"Section 2(1) of the Legal Practitioners Act, Cap L11, 2004 provides as follows: subject to provisions of this Act, a person shall be entitled to practice as barrister and solicitor if,



16

and only if his name is on the roll." And Section 24 of the same Act (interpretation section) says that: "In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, the following expressions have the meaning assigned to them respectively, that to say - "Legal Practitioner" means a person entitled in accordance with the provisions of this Act to practice as a barrister or Solicitor, either generally for the purposes of law, particular office or proceedings"?
This Court has considered the above provisions in several cases. For instance, in the well known case of Okafor v. Nweke (2007) 10 NWLR (Pt. 1043) 521, wherein a motion on notice was signed by J.H.C. Okolo, SAN & Co,. this Court per Onnoghen JSC, (as he then was) categorically states as follows:-
"The combined effect of the above provisions is that for a person to be qualified to practice as a legal practitioner, he must have his name in the roll, otherwise, he cannot engage in any form of legal practice in Nigeria---J.H.C. Okolo SAN & Co. is not a legal practitioner recognized by the law, it follows that the said J.H.C. SAN & Co. cannot legally sign and/or file any process in the Courts and



17

as such, the Motion on Notice---Notice of Cross Appeal and brief of argument-- -all signed and issued by the firm known and called J.H.C. Okolo SAN & Co., are incompetent in law particularly as the said firm of J.H.C. Okolo SAN & Co. is not a registered legal practitioner. See also SLB Consortium v. NNPC (2006) 9 NWLR (pt. 1252) 317, wherein this Court per Fabiyi, JSC, explained the rationale for this principle, as follows: "The signature of Adewale Adesokan & Co. on the originating summons of the appellant robs the process of competence ab initio as the said firm is not a registered legal practitioner enrolled to practice law as Barristers and Solicitors in this Court---. In the prevailing circumstance, all the proceedings which rested on the inchoate originating summons, are deemed not to have taken place in law. One cannot put something on nothing and expect to stand. This is as stated decades ago in UAC v. Macfoy (1962) AC 160. "Yes, one cannot put something on nothing and expect it to stand, which means that there is no case for adjudication. See Min. of W & T, Adamawa State v. Yakubu (2013) 6 NWLR (Pt. 1351) 481, wherein this Court



18

observed that:
"The fatal effect of the signing of an originating process by a law firm is that the entire suit was incompetent ab initio. It was dead at the point of filing. This highlights the painful realities that confronts a litigant when counsel fails to sign processes as stipulated by law. The originating process is fundamentally defective and incompetent. It is inchoate, legally non-existent. Thus, this issue touches on jurisdiction, which is aptly described as the pillar upon which the entire case stands, and once it is shown that the Court lacks jurisdiction, the foundation of the case is not only shaken, the case crumbles. The processes filed by a law firm in this case were dead on the point of filing, and in the eyes of the law. They are not only defective but legally non existent." Per Augie, JSC (pp. 23 - 27, paras E - A).
Therefore, since the Amended Notice of Appeal in the present appeal was signed by F. T. Odebata Esq. of counsel, same does not in any way violate the provisions of Section 2 (1) and 24 of the Legal Practitioners Act, Cap. L11, 2004 and as such, contrary to the Respondent's assertion in ground 1 of her preliminary



19

objection, the Amended Notice of Appeal which was made use of to commence the present appeal is competent and shall be reckoned with by this Court in the determination of this Appeal. I so hold.
​
With reference to the 2nd ground of the Respondent's objection to the appellant's appeal which has to do with the alleged non-juristic nature of the Respondent. Suffice it to say that, as rightly pointed out by the Respondent's counsel in his brief of argument before this Court, the Respondent sued before the lower Court is a combination of two names - Power Holding Company of Nigeria and in bracket Benin Electricity Distribution Company which means the names are being used interchangeably or alternatively. It is a notorious fact and trite law for that matter, that this Court cannot choose and pick between the two names used to describe the Respondent by the Appellant in this appeal because for all intents and purposes, Benin Electricity Distribution Company that is put in bracket after Power Holding Company of Nigeria presupposes that Power Holding Company of Nigeria is otherwise known as Benin Electricity Distribution Company, whereas, going by the materials



20

placed before this Court, no company is so registered in Nigeria as Power Holding Company of Nigeria (Benin Electricity Distribution Company).
​That being the case, the Appellant has committed a fundamental error in the choice of the personality that he should sued in the present appeal and the error is not one that can be treated as a misnomer which can be waived because it bothers on the identity of the party the instant appeal should be lodged against. See MAERSK LINE & ANOR. V. ADDIDE INVESTMENT LTD & ANOR (2002) LPELR-1811 (SC) where it was held that:
"A primary step in setting the limit is to bear in mind the distinction between two possible mistakes namely a mistake as to the name of a party intended to be sued and a mistake as to the identity of the party to be sued. The former is a misnomer which can be put right by amendment, whereas the latter is not. In the words of Dawson, E. J in Bridge shipping case (Supra) at P. 738." A mistake in the name of the party is not, to my mind the same thing a mistake in the belief that X is the landlord. That is not to mistake the name of X, but to mistake the identity of the landlord. "Similarly



21

illustrating the distinction but in a different context, Donaldson, L. J., in Evans Construction co. Ltd. V. Charrington & Co. Ltd. and. Another (1983) 1 All ER 310 said at 317: "In applying RSC ord 20, R 5(3) it is, in my judgment, important to bear in mind that there is a real distinction between suing A in the mistaken belief that A is the party who is responsible for the matters complained of and seeking to sue B, but mistakenly describing or naming him as X and thereby suing A instead of B. The rule is designed to correct the latter and not the former category of mistake. "I find the test postulated by Delvin L. J, in Davies V. Elsby Brothers Ltd. (1960) 3 All ER 672, 676, apt and I gratefully adopt it. The test is this: How would a reasonable person receiving the document take it? If, in all the circumstances of the case and looking at the document as a whole, he would say to himself "of course it must mean me or not and I shall have to make wrong.", then there is a case of mere misnomer. If on the other hand, he would say: "I cannot tell from the document itself whether they mean me or not and I shall have to make inquiry" then it seems to me that one is getting beyond the realm of misnomer.



22

Per AYOOLA, JSC (Pp 64 - 65, paras D - F).
Related to that is the fact that Power Holding Company of Nigeria is already a moribund company and has since been taken over by various electricity distribution companies all over the country. As such, no action can be instituted against it. See MAINSTREET BANK REGISTRARS LTD. V. OGUNDIMU (2022) LPELR - 57283 (CA).
Be that as it may, in order to establish the corporate personality of either Power Holding Company of Nigeria or Benin Electricity Distribution Company, the certificate of incorporation of either or both of them must be placed before the Court as it is not permissible by the law for Court to assume juristic status of a company without having his certificate of incorporation placed before it. See BANK OF BARODA V. IYALABANI CO. LTD (2002) LPELR- 743 (SC) where it was held that:
"In A.C.B. Plc. v. Emostrade Ltd. (supra) Kalgo, J.S.C. at page 520 had the following to say: "It is also not enough to assume that because a company uses the name 'limited' on the writ of summons as plaintiff, that company must be a limited liability company entitled to sue. The company's status must be proved



23

especially in this case where it was denied to be a limited liability company at the time of the transaction. This was not proved in this case and cannot be presumed either. The respondent as plaintiff, is therefore not a legal entity or juristic person entitled to sue and be sued in law. See Carlen (Nig.) v. University of Jos (1994) 1 NWLR (Pt. 323) 631; Shitta v. Ligali (1941) 16 NLR 23; Fawehinmi v. NBA (No.2) (1989) 2 NWLR (Pt. 105) 558. The respondent is also not one of the bodies or associations which even though not incorporated, have been expressly or impliedly conferred with a right to sue or be sued by statutes."
Per EJIWUNMI, JSC (Pp. 19-20, paras. G-D)
​Also, in EKWEOZOR & ORS V. REG. TRUSTEES OF THE SAVIORS APOSTOLIC CHURCH OF NIGERIA (2020) LPELR-49568 (SC) where it was held that:
"...Assuming it were to be conceived that the appellants in their pleadings joined issues with the respondent in respect of paragraphs 6A-6C, 8, 9A, 9B, 9D and 9E of the Further Amended Statement of Claim, it is submitted that the law would then require the respondent to produce proof of the juristic personality of the respondent. This burden would be



24

discharged by the tendering of the certificate of incorporation, as rightly opined by Onnoghen, J.S.C. (as he then was) in NNPC v LUTIN INVESTMENT LTD. (2006) 2 NWLR (Pt. 965) 506 at 527 where his Lordship held thus: "...That apart, it is trite law that the only way incorporation of a company can be established in any proceeding is by tendering the certificate of its incorporation… " Per PETER-ODILI, JSC (P. 37, paras. B-F)
Thus, as rightly argued by the Respondent's counsel in his brief of argument, the Respondent is not a juristic person that can be sued by the Appellant. See Iyke Medical Merchandise V. Pfizer Inc. & Anor. (2001) LPELR- 1579 (SC), where it was held that:
"There is no doubt that as a general rule, only juristic persons have the inherent right and/or power to sue and be sued in their names. Non-legal persons or entities, again as a general proposition of law, may neither sue nor be sued except of course, where such right to sue or be sued is created and/or vested by or under a statute. Juristic persons who may sue or be sued eo nomine have been recognised to include: (i) Natural persons, that is to say, human beings; (ii)



25

Companies incorporated under the Companies Act; (iii) Corporations aggregate and corporations sole with perpetual succession; (iv) Certain unincorporated Association granted the status of legal personae by law such as (a) Registered Trade Unions; (b) Partnerships and (c) Friendly societies or sole proprietorships. See Fawehinmi V. Nigeria Bar Association (No. 2) (1989) 2 NWLR (Pt. 105) 558". Per Iguh, JSC (PP. 20 - 21, Paras. E - C).
Therefore, my Lords in view of non- registration of the Respondent as described by the Appellant under the Companies and Allied Matters Act, (CAMA) and the absence of any statute that so established the Respondent as sued by the Appellant in the instant appeal coupled with the fact that Power Holding Company of Nigeria has been taken over by other company(ies), I am of solemn view that the Respondent is a non-juristic person that can sue or be sued as done by the Appellant in this appeal. Accordingly, the Respondent's Notice of Preliminary Objection succeeds to the extent that the instant appeal was commenced against a non-juristic person and consequently, this Court lacks jurisdiction to entertain the Appeal. See 



26

REGISTERED  TRUSTEES OF THE AIRLINE OPERATORS OF NIGERIA VS. NAMA (2014) LPELR-22372 (SC) where it was held that:
"It is now well settled that a non-existing person, natural or artificial, cannot institute an action in Court, nor will an action be allowed to be maintained against a Defendant, who as sued, is not a legal person. Juristic or legal personality can only be donated by the enabling law. This can either be the Constitution or a Statute. If the enabling law provides for a particular name by way of juristic or legal personality, a party must sue or be sued in that name. He cannot sue or be sued in any other name. See ANYAEGBUNAM V. OSAKA (2000) 5 NWLR (pt. 657) 386, FAWEHINMI V. NIGERIAN BAR ASSOCIATION (No. 2) (1989) 2 NWLR (pt. 105) 558 at 595, ABUBAKAR V. YAR'ADUA (2008) 19 NWLR (PT. 1120) 1 at 150 - 152 paras G - H. The rationale behind this is that law suits are in essence the determination of legal rights and obligations in any given situation. Therefore, only such natural and juristic persons in whom the rights and obligations can be vested are capable of being proper parties to lawsuits before Courts of law."
Per OKORO, JSC (Pp. 18-19, paras.



27

E-B).

However, in the unlikely event that I am wrong in my finding that this Court lacks jurisdiction to entertain this appeal and in order to obviate the necessity of this Court being subjected to re-hearing the appeal, I am of the calm view that the substantive appeal should rather be considered on its merit.

Having said that, a cursory look at the Respondent's brief revealed that sole issue was formulated for the determination of the instant appeal. It reads thus:
"Whether the lower Court was right in holding that the Appellant's action is statute-barred and same was caught by the Public Officers Protection Act."

In his argument of the sole issue formulated for the determination of this appeal, learned counsel to the Respondent referred this Court to the pronouncement of the trial Court on the effect of a statute-barred action which is a dismissal of an action caught by statute of limitation and on the strength of the cases of: (i) Hassan V. Aliyu (2010) 17 NWLR (Pt. 1223) page 347 and; (ii) Crutech V. Obeten (2011) 15 NWLR (pt. 127) page 588 urged this Court to dismiss the Appellant's appeal because he filed his case before the lower Court in



28

January, 2010 to challenge his alleged wrongful dismissal which occurred in 2005. According to the Respondent, an interval of more than three months within which he is enjoined to seek for redress of his grievance(s) against the action of his employer has elapsed.

It is pertinent to place it on record that, the Appellant in this appeal was employed by the National Electric Power Authority, NEPA Zonal office, 5 Akpakpava Street, Benin City vide letter reference No. NEPA/23/5.001/1769/97 dated 30th June, 1997 as Officer IV (Accounts) and forming part of his conditions of service is the content of paragraph 5 of the said letter which was admitted as Exhibit A during the trial of the suit before trial Court. Photocopy of the same is at page 12/13 of the record of Appeal, it reads thus:
"During the probationary period, your appointment can be terminated by either side, by one month's notice in writing or payment of one month salary in lieu. Other conditions will be those stipulated for employees of your grade in the Authority's conditions of service dated 1978 and any amendments or policy which may be made from time to time." (Underlining mine for



29

emphasis).

A cursory look at the above-quoted paragraph of Exhibit A reveals that the Appellant's appointment is governed by NEPA conditions of service dated 1978 which was admitted as Exhibit G during the trial of the suit at the lower Court. Again, documents tendered before the trial Court by the Appellant during trial and admitted in evidence as could be gathered from the unpaginated record of proceedings of the lower Court contained towards the end of the record, runs thus:
i Letter of offer of appointment - Exhibit A.
ii Letter of introduction dated 19th May, 2005 - Exhibit B.
iii Query dated 24th March, 2005 marked and tendered as Exhibit C.
iv Protest letter of 7th June, 2005 marked and tendered as Exhibit D.

Claimant's reply to query dated 10th August, 2005 marked and tendered Exhibit E claimant letter to the corporate Headquarters dated 8th September, 2006 Exhibit F Rules and Regulations guiding condition of service Exhibit G.

Pre-action statutory notice marked and tendered as Exhibit H”
​
It is manifestly clear from the above-mentioned Exhibits that no other document regulating the condition of



30

service of the Appellant was placed before this Court apart from Exhibit G.

Needless to say, my noble Lords, that, NEPA that employed the Appellant is a parastatal of the Federal Government of Nigeria whose employees are subjected to rules and regulations governing employment in the civil or public service. Thus, whatever is provided for under Exhibit G tendered by the Appellant during the trial of his case before the trial Court, shall for all intents and purposes be applicable to him, as far as his employment and other conditions of service with the respondent is concerned.

RESOLUTION
Having digested the respective cases of both parties to this appeal alongside the Exhibits tendered before the trial Court which inter alia include Exhibits B (i.e. letter of introduction of the Appellant dated May 19, 2005), C (i.e. Query dated 24/3/2005 given to the Appellant), D (i.e. Protest letter dated 7th June 2005 written against the Appellant by one Mrs Bose Ayu), F, (Protest letter written by the Appellant dated 8th September, 2006) and G (i.e. Chapter 4 of the Appellant's employment's regulation governing discipline of its officials), particularly



31

Exhibits F and G.

It is to be placed on record that a cursory look at Exhibit F which is the protest letter written by the Appellant dated 8th September, 2006 addressed to General Manager (HRM), Power Holding Company of Nigeria Plc; Corporate Headquarters, Maitama-Abuja duly signed by him, will reveal that at page 2, paragraphs 3, 4, 5 and 6 thereof, the Appellant indicated that on 4th April, 2005, May, 2005, 1st June, 2005 and 4th July, 2005 making four consecutive occasions, he was given queries by his employer.

Again, by virtue of Exhibit D which is a letter titled: Re: An ad-hoc disciplinary committee set up to investigate an alleged case of non-distribution of 333 No. MD Bills (in the month of March, 2005) and General misconduct preferred against Mr. Godwin Okhilua - officer II (M), Akenzua Service Unit, Benin City and after consideration of allegations levelled against the Appellant, he was interdicted by the committee.
​
Now, as earlier mentioned in this judgment, a cursory look at page 2, paragraphs 3, 4, 5 and 6 of Exhibit F revealed that the Appellant had been given queries on four (4) consecutive times and going by the provision



32

of paragraphs 41.7.2, 41.7.3 and 41.8.18 of the Appellant's employer's regulations governing the discipline of its staff (i.e. Exhibit G) quoted hereunder, the Appellant's employment is liable to be terminated as done by the Respondent. They read thus:
"41.7.2 An employee who commits any of the offences under Regulation 41.8.1 or 41.8.18 shall have his appointment terminated "for services no longer required".
"41.7.3 If an employee has received three warnings, his services will be dispensed with and his appointment terminated for services no longer required."
"41.8.18 Acts which are detrimental to the image or efficient performance of the Authority"

A cursory look at the 1st two paragraphs of page 63 of the record of appeal quoted hereunder, which is a copy of the Appellant's dismissal letter issued to him by the Respondent, will reveal that Appellant's dismissal by the Respondent was carried out in accordance with Respondent Rules and Regulation inter-alia reproduced above.

The said paragraphs read thus:
"Management has carefully considered the report of the Ad-hoc Disciplinary Committee that investigated the case of general



33

misconduct and non-distribution of 333 NO MD bills in the month of March, 2005 preferred against you and found your action blameworthy.
As you are aware, the penalty for general misconduct and non-distribution of bills is dismissal from the service of the company in accordance with regulation 41.9.1 and 41.9.9 of the company's condition of service."

Therefore, in view of the provision of Exhibit G reproduced above and Appellant's disclosure in Exhibit F that he had been queried on four consecutive times, interdicted along the line coupled with the fact that no other Rules or regulation, regulating the Appellant's condition of service was placed before this Court by the Appellant apart from Exhibit G which presupposes that the Appellant's appointment by the Respondent can be likened to an appointment under the public service of the Federation and as such, public service Rules, regulations etc. are applicable to Appellant's employment. That being the case, my noble Lords, I am of candid view that the Appellant was properly dismissed from the service of the Respondent in accordance with the relevant rules and regulations governing discipline of erring



34

Respondent's employees.
See Isheno v. Julius Berger (Nig) PLC (2008) LPELR - 1544 (SC) where it was held that:-
"Where the employer fires an employee in compliance with the terms and conditions of their contract of employment, there is nothing the Court can do as such termination is valid in the eyes of the law. It is only where the employer, in terminating or dispensing with the services of an employee does so without due regard to the terms and conditions of the contract of employment between the parties that problems arise as such a termination is usually not tolerated by the Courts and are, without hesitation usually declared wrongful and appropriate measure of damages awarded to the plaintiff. Per Onnoghen, JSC (pp 35 - 36, paras E - A)."
Besides, contrary to the Appellant's contention that he was orally dismissed from the service of his employer, page 63 of the record of appeal is the letter of dismissal dated 31st August, 2005 with reference No. Ref. 26/C5.022/5776/2005 addressed to the Appellant. Although the acknowledgement column of the letter is not signed, the fact remains that he was formally dismissed from the service of his



35

employer. More so, he was employed by the same Benin Zonal Office of the Respondent that dismissed him and there is nothing in his letter of Appointment, Exhibit A or the Rules and Regulations governing his condition of service that requires the involvement of the Respondent's Headquarters while embarking on disciplinary action against employee of the Respondent.

Again, with reference to the Appellant's contention on whether the correspondence exchanged between the parties herein revives the limitation period vis-a-vis the determination of time when the cause of action accrues in the instant appeal, as well as whether the res in this appeal has been caught by limitation period.

First and foremost, the law is trite that negotiation, absence from jurisdiction or ignorance of law cannot affect limitation period. See Eboigbe v. NNPC (1994) LPELR-992 (SC) where it was held that:
"As for the period during which the parties engaged in negotiation, the law is that when in respect of a cause of action, the period of limitation begins to run, it is not broken and it does not cease to run merely because the parties are engaged in negotiation. The best cause



36

for a person to whom a right has accrued is to institute an action against the other party so as to protect his interest or right in case the negotiation fails. If as in this case, the negotiation does not result in a settlement or in an admission of liability, the law will not allow the time devoted to negotiation to be excluded from the period which should be taken into consideration for the determination of the question whether a claim has been statute barred. Negotiation by the parties does not prevent or stop time from running." Per Adio, JSC (pp. 13 - 14, paras F - B).

Furthermore, with respect to the time that the Appellant was alleged to be dismissed (i.e. 2005). It is crucial to note that the Respondent before this Court is supposed to be an agency of the Federal Government in respect of which the Federal Government has its equity shares. See Progressive Sea Foods (Nig) Ltd. V. IBEDC & Anor. (2020) LPELR - 49754 (CA).
​That being the case, mutatis mutandis, the condition of service applicable to officers in the public service of Nigeria will be applicable to the Respondent's employees until special conditions of service is drawn for them



37

and no evidence is placed before this Court that such special condition of service has been drawn for the employees of the Respondent.
Therefore, three months limitation period provided for the commencement of an action against public officer(s) by virtue of Section 2(a) of the Public Officers Protection Act is applicable to the Respondent's employees. Hence, whether the Appellant was dismissed in 2005 or 2006, since the Appellant's action that gave birth to the present suit was commenced in January 2010, undoubtedly, the three months period to commence the action by the Appellant against the Respondent has elapsed and as such, Suit No.: NICN/ABJ/304/2012 initially commenced by the Appellant in 2010 at the Federal High Court, Abuja is statute barred and once it is so, it becomes lifeless and liable to be dismissed as done by the trial Court.
​Based on the above analysis, I agree holistically with the trial Court in its finding at page 9 of the judgment being appealed against which is contained in the record of appeal wherein the trial Court held thus:
It therefore follows that the claims of the claimant in the instant case are caught up by



38

Section 2(a) of Public Officer's Act in sum total, the action of the claimant commenced on the 6th of June, 2010 is statute-barred, having been commenced more than three months after the cause of action arose in 2005. The case accordingly fails and is hereby dismissed.

In light of the foregoing findings of this Court in respect of the Respondent's preliminary objection that the present appeal is incompetent due to non-juristic status of the Respondent which robs this Court of its jurisdiction to entertain this appeal coupled with unmeritorious nature of the appeal itself which makes same liable to be and is hereby dismissed.

Accordingly, the judgment of the lower Court is hereby affirmed.

There shall be no order as to cost.

MISITURA OMODERE BOLAJI-YUSUFF, J.C.A.: I have read the judgment of my brother, LATEEF ADEBAYO GANIYU, JCA. I concur with the reasoning and conclusion therein that this appeal has no merit. I too dismiss the appeal.

SYBIL ONYEJI NWAKA GBAGI, J.C.A.: I had the advantage of reading in draft the judgment just delivered by my learned brother, Lateef Adebayo Ganiyu, JCA. I agree that the appeal lacks merit and I too



39

dismiss it.
​
I also abide by the consequential orders as to cost.



40

Appearances:

...For Appellant(s)
I.O.I. Adebayo, Esq. holds brief of Roland Otaru, SANFor Respondent(s)
