JOSEPH OLUBUNMI KAYODE OYEWOLE, J.C.A. (Delivering the Leading Judgment): This is in respect of an appeal against the decision of the High Court of Kogi State, Lokoja Judicial Division sitting in Lokoja, Kogi State delivered on the 25th April, 2024 by Hon Justice I. A. JAMIL, J. or Hon. Justice Isa Jamil ABDULAHI, J. as the learned trial Judge various signed the various processes which emanated from his Court.

The Respondent approached the lower Court for the enforcement of his fundamental rights upon which the said Court on the 9th February, 2024 granted the following interim reliefs in his favour:
​(1) An order of interim injunction restraining the Respondent either by itself or its agents, servants, privies, and persons acting for, through or under it from continuing to harass, threaten to arrest or detain or in any manner whatsoever arresting, detaining, prosecuting or persecuting the Applicant, his former Appointees, his staff or family members, on the basis of the false allegation of corruption made by the Applicant's political adversaries and the Respondent itself pending the hearing and determination of the substantive originating motion


1

for the enforcement of his fundamental rights.
(2) An order of interim injunction restraining the Respondent from doing anything whatsoever connected or incidental thereto which may render nugatory the issues raised before this Honourable Court in the substantive originating motion of the Applicant for the enforcement of his fundamental rights pending the hearing of the fundamental right action.

Subsequently, the substantive application for the enforcement of the Respondent's fundamental rights was heard and judgment in respect thereof was delivered on the 17th April, 2024. On the 25th April, 2024 the Respondent approached the lower Court with an ex-parte application wherein he sought the following orders:
1. An order of the Honourable Court for the issuance of Form 49- Notice to show cause why order of committal should not be made against the Executive Chairman of the Respondent- Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC).
2. An order for service of Form 49-Notice to show cause why order of committal should not be made on the Executive Chairman of the Respondent-Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC) at EFCC Corporate



2

Headquarters, Plot 301/302, Research and Institution District, Abuja
3. And for such further order or further orders as this Honourable Court may deem fit to make in the circumstances.

The grounds for the said reliefs were stated thus:
a) On the 9th day of February, 2024, this Honourable Court made an order vide Motion No.: HCL/71M/2024 among others, restraining the Respondent from doing anything whatsoever connected or incidental thereto which may render nugatory the issues raised before this Honourable Court in the substantive originating motion of the Applicant for the enforcement of his fundamental rights, pending the hearing of the fundamental right action.
b) That even though Counsel to the Respondent was present in Court when the said order was made, the Applicant through the official of this Honourable Court ensured that the said order of Court was still served on the Respondent together with Form 48 - Notice of Consequence of Disobedience to Order of Court.
c) That the crux of the matter that was pending before this Honourable Court in the fundamental right proceeding is that the incessant harassment, threats of arrest and



3

detentions negative press releases, malicious prosecution of the Applicant without any formal invitation, upon the instigation of the Applicant's political adversaries in Nigeria upon the false and politically motivated allegation of corruption is a misuse of executive powers, a misfeasance in public office, abuse of power and an unjustifiable interference with the fundamental rights of the Applicant.
d) That despite the pendency of the order of this Court made on the 9th day of February, 2024, the Respondent went ahead to file a charge against the Applicant herein, in deviance to the said Order restraining the Respondent from doing anything whatsoever connected or incidental thereto which may render nugatory the issues raised before this Honourable Court in the substantive originating motion of the Applicant for the enforcement of his fundamental rights, pending the hearing of the fundamental right action.
e) That further to the above, on the 17th day of April 2024, at about 8:00 am in the morning, during the pendency of the said order of this Honourable Court, the Respondent caused its men to lay siege on the residence of the Applicant with the



4

intention to arrest/harass the Applicant despite the existence of the order of this Court against same.
f) That the steps taken by the Respondent above, were taken while they had an appeal pending before the Court of Appeal Abuja Division, challenging the order of this Honourable Court, which appeal has not been determined as at the time the siege took place.
g) That the actions of the Respondent referenced above, are in utter deviance to the orders of this Honourable Court, thereby necessitating issuance and service of Form 49- Notice to show why order of committal should not be made on the Executive Chairman of the Respondent, who is the person responsible for the day-to-day running of the Respondent and a whom officers and men of the Respondent are directly accountable to.
h) That I know as of fact that, all the steps taken by the Respondent in deviance to the order of this Court were taken while the order subsists and the appeal was pending.
i) That it is a matter of urgency and extreme importance to grant this application as the fundamental right to freedom of movement, fair hearing has been violated in defiance of the order of this



5

Court.

After considering the said ex-parte application, the lower Court ruled in favour of the Respondent and granted the orders sought on the 25th April, 2024 as aforesaid. The matter was then adjourned to the 13th May, 2024 for the Appellant's Chairman to appear before the lower Court to answer to form 49 ordered to be served on him.

Dissatisfied, the Appellant invoked the appellate jurisdiction of this Court via a Notice of Appeal filed on the 29th April, 2024 containing three grounds. At the hearing of the appeal Chief Okutepa, SAN adopted the Appellant's brief filed on the 17th May, 2024 as well as the Reply brief filed on the 5th June, 2024 as the arguments of the Appellant in the appeal as well as in response to the preliminary objection of the Respondent which was argued in the Respondent's brief. Mr. Adedipe, SAN on his part adopted the Respondent's brief filed on the 31st May, 2024 wherein he raised and argued a preliminary objection to the competence of the Appeal.
​
In the said preliminary objection, the Respondent challenges the competence of the Appeal as follows:
1. An order to dismiss/strike out the Appeal in limine, for



6

incompetence and lack of jurisdiction.
2. An order to strike out Grounds 1, 2, and 3 of the Appellant's Notice of Appeal filed on 29/4/2024, for incompetence, including issues 1 & 2 set out in Appellant's brief of argument, purporting to have derived from the defective grounds of appeal.

The stated grounds for the said preliminary objection are as follows:
1. Appellant lacks locus standi to appeal by proxy, in favour of the Executive Chairman of the Appellant, whose quasi-criminal/criminal liability on the contempt proceedings, is personal.
2. Both Appellant and its Executive Chairman are estopped from activating this appeal having withdrawn the appeal against the ex parte order of 9th February 2024. Thus this appeal is an abuse of Court and judicial process.
3. Appellant's brief of argument is defective and in breach of the mandatory provision of paragraph 8(3) of the Court of Appeal (Fast Track) Practice Directions, 2021.
4. Ground 1 of the Notice of Appeal is vague and imprecise. It is in breach of Order 17 Rule 4 of the Court of Appeal Rules, 2021. It does not emanate from the order purportedly being appealed



7

against.
5. Both Grounds 2 & 3 of the Notice of Appeal raise fresh issues, for which no leave was sought and obtained. The said Grounds of Appeal also bother on mixed law and fact, whereof no leave was sought and obtained, to raise them.
6. Issues 1 and 2 argued in Appellant's brief of Argument, derive from these defective grounds of appeal. They are liable to be struck out.
​
As earlier stated, the preliminary objection was argued in the Respondent's brief, precisely on pages 4-9 thereof while the response of the Appellant thereto is contained on pages 1-6 thereof. A calm consideration of the arguments of the two sides on the preliminary objection discloses an attempt by them to draw the Court into the whirlpool of genuflection at the false altar of technicalities which will only achieve the aim of obscuring the justice of this appeal. There is no contention on the fact that the appeal was filed within time and no arguments were raised about the compilation of the records as to suggest any dispute on whether it was duly entered in this Court. We therefore have not just a substantially competent notice of appeal but also one which was



8

properly entered in this Court thereby assuring the substantive jurisdiction of this Court. In the circumstances, fine as the contending arguments are, they are in my view, contentions on procedural irregularities which must bow at the feet of substantive jurisdiction. See ODOM & ORS VS PDP & ORS (2015) LPELR-24351 (SC), OBIUWEUBI VS. CBN (2011) LPELR-2185 (SC), BENUE STATE UNIVERSITY VS MOGAJI (2022) LPELR-56729 (CA) and KUBOR & ANOR VS. DICKSON & ORS (2012) LPELR-9817 (SC). I hereby overrule the preliminary objection and shall accordingly focus on the justice of the case which seems quite narrow from the issues ably argued by the eminent Senior Counsel on the two sides.

The Appellant distilled two issues for determination which were adopted by the Respondents. The said issues are as follows:
1. Whether the trial Court had jurisdiction to grant the Respondent's ex-parte application for issuance of Form 49 despite the fact that the ex-parte orders of 9th February 2024 which it sought to enforce, were already spent. (distilled from grounds 1 and 2 of the Notice of Appeal).
2. Whether the trial Court was right when it assumed



9

jurisdiction to hear and determine the Respondent's ex-parte application for issuance of Form 49 against the Executive Chairman of the Appellant, despite the fact that there was no proper service of the Requisite Forms 48 and 49. (distilled from ground 3).

I shall take the two issues together.
On the first issue, Chief Okutepa, SAN submitted that an interim order is never made to last indefinitely and referred to the position of this Court in CHRISTLIEB PLC & ORS VS MAJEKODUNMI & ORS (2008) LPELR- 8453 (CA) at 27-28. He pointed out that the lower Court had given a final judgment in the said matter on the 17th April, 2024 which implied that as of 25th April, 2024 when the lower Court gave orders to enforce the interim orders made on the 9th February, 2024 the said interim orders had lapsed and there was nothing in existence to be enforced. He referred to GOODIE MINABO IBRU VS IKEJA HOTELS PLC (2017) LPELR-49867 (CA).

He reiterated the primacy of the existence of jurisdiction for a Court to competently adjudicate as laid out in MADUKOLU VS NKEMDILIM (1962) 2 NSCC 374 at 379 and submitted further that Courts do not have jurisdiction to



10

restrain the Appellant from carrying out its constitutional and statutory functions. He contended that this point was well acknowledged by the lower Court in the substantive judgment delivered on the 17th April, 2024 and in addition referred to IGP VS UBAH (2015) 11 NWLR (PT 1471) 505 at 433. He referred to the depositions of the Respondent in support of the ex-parte application for the issuance of Form 49 and submitted that the entire intendment of the Respondent was to use the Court to shield him from prosecution.
​
On the second issue, Chief Okutepa, SAN submitted that the orders made by the lower Court for the issuance of Form 49 were made without jurisdiction as there was no proper service of Forms 48 and 49 on the alleged Contemnor. He argued that the contempt proceedings affect the liberty of citizens and that as such the provisions relating thereto were usually strictly and narrowly interpreted. He referred to REGISTERED TRUSTEES OF NIGERIAN ASSOCIATION OF MEDICAL HERBALIST & ANOR VS GAMBARA (2015) LPELR-40739 (CA) at 5-12, ADENIJI ADELE VS OGBE (1989) 9 NWLR (PT 567) 650, LAWRENCE OKWUEZE VS EMMANUEL EJIOFOR (2000) 16 FWLR (PT 690) 389 at 394,



11

IGWE JOSIAH AGU & ORS VS OZO I.O.U. ANYALOGU & ORS (2002) 14 NWLR (PT 787) 294 at 309 and BANWAT & ANOR VS ASSOCIATION OF MEDICAL LABORATORY SCIENTISTS OF NIG. & ORS (2018) LPELR-45275 (CA) at 12-15. He urged the Court to resolve the two issues in favour of the Appellant.

Contrariwise, Mr. Adedipe, SAN argued that the order made on the 9th February, 2024 by the lower Court remained extant as it was not made pending the determination of the pending suit and further that in the absence of a copy of the said final judgment in its records, this Court cannot be expected to speculate. He contended that the correct position of the law was that an ex parte order once made remained extant until formally set aside and to support this proposition referred to KUBOR VS DICKSON (2013) 4 NWLR (PT 1345) 534. He therefore submitted that the Appellant was liable for contempt of the said orders.
​
The learned Senior Counsel argued that the submissions of the Appellant on the restriction of the Appellant from performing its statutory had no foundation in the grounds of appeal while the issue of non-service of Forms 48 and 49 had no support in the records



12

of appeal and therefore urged the Court to discountenance those arguments as the Court lacked the jurisdiction to entertain them. He urged the Court to dismiss the appeal.

In his Reply arguments, Chief Okutepa, SAN pointed out that his arguments were evaded by his learned friend of the inner bar and highlighted portions of the record of appeal buttressing his contentions on non-service of Forms 48 and 49 on the Executive Chairman of the Appellant.

In my considered view, the main issue upon which this appeal turns is whether the interim orders made by the lower Court on the 9th February 2024 were still extant on the 25th April, 2024 when the order for issuance of Form 49, on appeal herein, was made.

The contending positions of the two sides had earlier been outlined. At the risk of repetition, it is apposite to reproduce the said orders made on the 9th February, 2024 as couched by the learned trial Judge the enrolment of which is contained on pages 9-10 of the record of appeal thus:
ENROLMENT ORDER
Upon the application of the Learned Counsel to the Applicant (S.A. Abbas Esq.) in Motion NO. HCL/71M/2024 seeking for the following



13

reliefs:-
(1) An order of interim injunction restraining the Respondent either by itself or its agents, servants, privies, and persons acting for, through or under it from continuing to harass, threaten to arrest or detain or in any manner whatsoever arresting, detaining, prosecuting or persecuting the Applicant, his former Appointees, his staff or family members, on the basis of the false allegation of corruption made by the Applicant's political adversaries and the Respondent itself pending the hearing and determination of the substantive originating motion for the enforcement of his fundamental rights.
(2) An order of interim injunction restraining the Respondent from doing anything whatsoever connected or incidental thereto which may render nugatory the issues raised before this Honourable Court in the substantive originating motion of the Applicant for the enforcement of his fundamental rights pending the hearing of the fundamental right action.
(3) And for such further order or other order(s) as this Honourable Court may deem fit to make in the circumstances of this case.
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED
And after a careful perusal of



14

the affidavit in support of the application, together with the written address in support thereto and the elaborate oral submission of S.A. Abbas of Counsel, I am satisfied on the facts disclosed in the affidavits before me, accordingly, this application succeeds and it hereby granted as prayed. Reliefs one and two as sought in the Motion are granted as prayed.
It is so ordered.
Given under the Seal of this Court and the Hand of the Presiding Judge this day of February, 2024.

The said order carried the signature of the learned trial Judge under the name of Hon. Justice I. A. Jamil. I have taken the liberty to highlight portions of the said orders which showed in plain language that the lower Court granted the two main reliefs as prayed. The Respondent in seeking the said reliefs limited the tenure of relief (1) to pending the hearing and determination of the substantive originating motion for the enforcement of his fundamental rights. While in relation to relief (2) it was pending the hearing of the fundamental right action. Whatever be the case, the Respondent did not intend the tenure of any of the two main reliefs he sought at the lower



15

Court to extend beyond the determination of his originating motion for the enforcement of his fundamental rights and that was what the lower Court granted. This point was apparently missed out by Mr. Adedipe, SAN who commended the case of KUBOR VS DICKSON (supra) to us as the appropriate precedent to follow. While the facts of the said case have no bearing with the case at hand, in the said case ONNOGHEN, JSC (as he then was) in the leading judgment of the Apex Court expounded the position of the law with regards to the tenure of interim orders thus:
Generally speaking interim orders are not permanent as they are made to last for a while - usually pending the determination of the suit or motion on notice as in this case. The legal question in this issue is whether whatever such interim orders achieved in the interim can be ignored or considered nonexistent after the expiration of the time it was in operation particularly when the order is mandatory in nature and the command had been obeyed? Can the law undo what had been done in obedience of Court order in the circumstances of this case?
I do not think that the coming to an end of an interim order



16

adversely affects whatever that order was meant to achieve or achieved. If the order was a restraining order you cannot say that while it lasted or remained in operation, the party sought to be restrained was never restrained It only means that the restraint is now at an end and that the party is free of the restraint. See KUBOR & ANOR VS. DICKSON & ORS (2012) LPELR-9817(SC) at 40-41.

On the 2nd May, 2024 the Appellant filed a motion ex-parte before this Court which motion was heard and granted by this Court on the 3rd May, 2024. Among the materials placed before this Court in that application was the final judgment of the lower Court in the originating summons for the enforcement of the fundamental rights of the Respondent which forms part of the Court's record as exhibit JSO to the said application and would be accorded judicial notice. See Section 122(2)(m) of the Evidence Act, 2011 (as amended), NATIONAL INLAND WATERWAYS AUTHORITY VS STANDARD TRUST BANK PLC (2007) LPELR-8943 (CA) and PERETU VS. AG BAYELSA STATE & ORS (2016) LPELR-45608 (CA). 

The said judgment of the lower Court was the final determination of the Respondent's said



17

originating summons for the enforcement of his fundamental rights. Therein the lower Court not only failed to extend the interim orders it earlier made on the 9th February, 2024 but couched the final reliefs thus:
1. An order is hereby granted enforcing the Fundamental Rights of the applicant to liberty and freedom of movement and fair hearing, by restraining the Respondent by themselves, their agents, servants or privies from continuing to harass, threaten to arrest or detain or in any manner whatsoever arresting, detaining or persecuting the Applicant, on the basis of the Criminal Charges now pending before the Federal High Court, Abuja to wit: Charge No. FHC/ABJ/CR/550/2022 between FRN v. Ali Bello & Anor, without prejudice to the power of the said Federal High Court, to make any Order as it may deem just in the determination of the rights of the Applicant and the Respondent as may be submitted to her for consideration and determination.
2. An order is hereby granted directing the Respondent to bring before the said Federal High Court, or any such appropriate Court, such criminal Charge, allegation or Complaint in respect of whereof the



18

Applicant is reasonably believed by the Respondent to have committed any offence subject of its jurisdiction, provided that the Respondent shall not invite, arrest or detain the Applicant on account of a reasonable belief that the Applicant has committed any financial crime, without first obtaining the leave of a superior Court of Record, especially haven regard to the antecedents of the Respondent in the manner it has managed its engagements with the Applicant.

What all the aforementioned points indicate conclusively is that the interim Orders made by the lower Court were no longer in existence on the 25th April, 2024 when the Respondent moved the lower Court for contempt proceedings against the Appellant in enforcement thereof. The situation radically differed from what the Apex Court was confronted with in KUBOR & ANOR VS. DICKSON & ORS (supra) where it was a question of the continued existence of the state of affairs created in compliance with the interim orders, exhibit N in that case, after the withdrawal and cessation of the existence of the suit from which it arose. A Court cannot make an order for the enforcement of a spent order. See



19

BRITTANIA-U (NIG) LTD VS SEPLAT PETROLEUM DEVELOPMENT CO. LTD & ORS (2016) LPELR- 40007 (SC), IBRU V. IKEJA HOTELS PLC (2017) LPELR-49867 (CA). It is therefore improper of the lower Court to have initiated contempt proceedings against the Appellant in enforcement of the interim orders made by that Court after the expiration thereof.

Chief Okutepa, SAN contested the jurisdictional competence of the lower Court or even any Court to restrain the Appellant from performing its statutory duties. This was deflected by Mr. Adedipe, SAN with the riposte that the said argument was not covered by any of the grounds of appeal. With due respect to the learned Senior Counsel, I do not agree that the very important point should be so lightly waived aside. Embedded in the entire appeal is the challenge to the jurisdictional competence of the lower Court.
​
Jurisdiction is the very bedrock of the exercise of judicial power. Any exercise of judicial power without the requisite jurisdiction will be incapable of conferring any legal benefit on the victorious party notwithstanding the time, industry and resources expended. See CHIEF OF AIR STAFF & ORS VS. IYEN



20

(2005) LPELR-3167 (SC), ROFICO LTD VS STUDIO PRESS (NIG) PLC (2023) LPELR-60615(CA), DOGO VS TARE (2022) LPELR- 57401(CA), MOBIL PRODUCING COMPANY UNLIMITED VS LASEPA (2002) 18 NWLR (PT. 798) 1 and NICON INSURANCE LTD & ORS V. AMCON & ORS (2021) LPELR-56223 (CA). 

Essential and in fact fundamental to the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999 (as amended) is the doctrine of separation of powers. In Sections 4, 5 and 6 of the Constitution, broad and recognizable functions were allotted to each arm of government. The smooth operation of the ship of State depends largely on how each of the three arms of government faithfully carries out its functions without impeding the smooth functioning of the other arm. Where therefore the Legislature has created an executive body and ascribed powers to it, it is outside the jurisdictional competence of the Judiciary to prevent it from carrying out its statutory functions. This Court relying on various decisions of the Supreme Court made a vital pronouncement on the issue per BULKACHUWA, JCA (as he then was) thus:
"For a person, therefore, to go to Court to be shielded against criminal investigation



21

and prosecution is an interference with powers given by the Constitution to law officers in the control of criminal investigation. The plaintiff has no legally recognizable right to which the Court can come to his aid. His claim is not one the Court can take cognizance of for it has disclosed no cause of action. The plaintiff cannot expect a judicial fiat preventing a law officer in the exercise of his Constitutional power.”
It is indeed trite that no Court has the power to stop the Police from investigating a crime and whether to or how it is done is a matter within the discretion of the Police. See Fawehinmi v I.G.P. (2002) 7 NWLR (Pt. 767) 606; Agbi v. Ogbeh (2005) 8 NWLR (Pt. 926) 40; Christlieb PLC v. Majekodunmi (2008) 16 NWLR (Pt. 1113) 324; Onah v. Okenwa (2010) 7 NWLR; Hassan v. E.F.C.C. (2013) LPELR (CA). See ATTORNEY GENERAL ANAMBRA STATE VS. CHIEF CHRIS UBA (2005) 15 NWLR (PT 947) 44. See also IGP & ANOR VS UBAH & ORS (2014) LPELR-23968(CA).
I may only point out that pursuant to Section 8(5) of the Economic and Financial Crimes (Establishment) Act, 2004 the Appellant is vested with all the powers of the Nigerian Police. In


22

totality, therefore, I have come to the inevitable conclusion that the orders made by the lower Court initiating contempt proceedings against the Appellant through its Executive Chairman were made without jurisdiction and do constitute a gross abuse of the processes of the Court.

I therefore resolve the first issue in favour of the Appellant and against the Respondent.

The conclusion reached on the said first issue has thereby rendered the second issue academic with the implication that it shall not be accorded any judicial attention in the circumstances.

In totality, I hold that this appeal is meritorious and I therefore allow it.

Consequently, the ruling delivered by the lower Court alongside the orders initiating contempt proceedings against the Appellant through its Executive Chairman in Motion No. HCL/190M/2024 on the 25th April, 2024 are hereby set aside.

Cost of N1 million is awarded against the Respondent and in favour of the Appellant.
​
ABUBAKAR MAHMUD TALBA, J.C.A.: I had the advantage of reading in draft the leading judgment of my learned brother, Joseph Olubunmi Kayode Oyewole, JCA. This appeal emanates from the



23

decision of Kogi State High Court of Justice sitting in Lokoja Division, delivered on 25th April, 2024 in Suit No: HCL/68M/2024.

On the 9th February 2024 the lower Court granted an application made pursuant to a motion exparte No: HCL/71M/2024. The reliefs granted were ably captured in the leading judgment.

After the lower Court had delivered its judgment in the substantive originating motion for the enforcement of the applicant's fundamental rights on the 17th April 2024.

On the 25th April 2024, the Applicant/Respondent approached the lower Court vide exparte application wherein he sought for reliefs as contained in the leading judgment.
​
Now after the lower Court had determined the substantive application for the enforcement of the Applicant/Respondent's fundamental rights, it is elementary knowledge that the exparte order granted on the 9th February 2024 had lapsed. The learned trial Judge was in grave error when he entertained an exparte application on 25th of April 2024 and granted the reliefs when he knew that the substantive originating motion was determined on 17th of April 2024. The exparte motion of 25th April, 2024 was no



24

doubt an abuse of Court process. The exparte order granted on 9th February, 2024 was not existing, having elapsed. It is trite law that you cannot put something on nothing.

I am not impressed with the submission of senior Counsel for the Respondent that the correct position of the law was that an exparte order once made remained extant until formally set aside and he went further to support his proposition with the case of Kubor V. Dickson (2013) 4 NWLR (Pt 1345) 534, which case is quite distinguishable from the instant case. The proposition of learned senior Counsel betrays the high level experience of a senior Counsel.
​
I must also state some few words on the effect of failure to serve Forms 48 and 49 in contempt proceedings. The learned senior Counsel for the Respondent submitted that the issue of non service of Forms 48 and 49 had no support in the records of appeal and he urge the Court to discountenance the argument. In his reply brief the Appellant's senior Counsel pointed out that his argument were evaded by his learned friend of the inner bar and he highlighted portions of the record of appeal buttressing his contentions of non-service of



25

Forms 48 and 49 on the Executive Chairman of the Appellant.

It is settled law that the Sheriffs and Civil Process Law and the Judgment (Enforcement) Rules are made in such a way as to ensure that a person being deprived his liberty in respect of an order or judgment made in civil litigation deliberately intended to flout the order of the Court. Furthermore, the law and its rules are made to ensure that a person is given an opportunity to retrace his steps by service on him of Forms 48 & 49.
If he remains recalcitrant then the Court will descend on him and commit him to prison. The price placed on human liberty by our law should grow rather than diminish with time. I do not think the law of this country regarding the freedom of the individual has descended to such abysmal depth of rough and ready justice of a medieval era that a person should be thrown into prison for contempt without giving him an opportunity to retrace his steps. Per Ubaezonu, JCA in Ojeme V. Momodu (1995) 6 NWLR (Pt. 403) 587.
​
In conclusion, I agree with my learned brother that the preliminary objection is overruled while the appeal is immensely meritorious. I also



26

allow the appeal and I abide by the consequential order(s) in the leading judgment including the order as to cost.

DANLAMI ZAMA SENCHI, J.C.A.: I was privilege to read before now the draft lead judgment of my learned brother, JOSEPH OLUBUNMI KAYODE OYEWOLE, JCA, just delivered. The lead judgment substantially captured and reflected my view I expressed during the conference of the panel of Justices that heard this appeal.

I however want to chip in one or two issues. Firstly, the Appellant cannot be regarded as a meddlesome interloper in this appeal. The fundamental rights action was initiated against the Appellant that led to the contempt proceedings. The Appellant is an institution or a statutory body/person and not a biological person. Therefore, service of contempt processes on the occupier of the office of the Appellant or any officer in the institution or statutory body is not akin to biological person. See Egbebu V. I. G. P. & ORS, (2016) LPELR - 40224 (CA) FCDA V. AGAY, (2010) 14 NWLR (Pt 1213) 377 at 391 - 392, Military Governor of Kwara State V. Afolabi, (1991) 6 NWLR (Pt 196) 212, I.G.P V. Akpan, (2008) All FWLR (Pt 425) 1782 at 1793,



27

Bureau of Public Enterprises & Anor V. BFI Group Corp. (2022) LPELR-56791 (CA). Thus, the fact that the occupier/chairman of the Appellant was served with the contempt proceedings emanating from Suit No. HCL/68M/2024 being the alter ego of the Appellant, does not preclude or disqualify the Appellant from appealing the contempt proceedings.

In respect of issue one of the Appellant, the law is crystal clear that the ex-parte Orders of 9th February, 2024 sought to be enforced by the Order granted, on 25/04/2024 despite the trial Court's decision of 17/04/2024 no longer has any life of enforceability because it had already lapsed and non-existent and thus the trial Court has no jurisdiction to enforce the orders made on 9/02/2024 by its decision of 25/04/2024. See Goodie Minabo Ibru V. Ikeja Hotels Plc, (2017) LPELR- 4987 (CA) Brittania- U (Nig) Ltd & ORS, V. Seplat Petroleum Development Co. Ltd LPELR- 40007 (SC) Alhaji Aminu Ahmed & Co. Nig Ltd V ACB Ltd (2001) 10 NWLR (Pt 721) 391, General Oil Ltd V. Oduntan(1990) 7 NWLR (Pt 163) 423 at 441.
​
The law is that where an interim order of injunction is made pending the determination of all



28

applications before the trial Court whether interlocutory or in substantive suit, the interim order ceases, lapses or end on the date the applications or substantive suit is determined or any subsequent order is made. See Christlieb Plc & Ors V. Majekodunmi & Ors, (2008) LPELR - 8453(CA), A.G. Federation V Fafunwa-Onikoyi, (2006) 18 NWLR (Pt 1010) 51 (CA).

In the instant appeal the trial Court's orders made on 25/04/2024 to enforce the ex-parte Orders of 9/02/2024 was made without jurisdiction. Having said the above I entirely agree with the comprehensive analysis, resolution, finding and conclusion reached in the lead judgment and I adopt same as mine that this appeal has merit and I allow the same as well.

Accordingly, the ex-parte decision and Orders made on 25/04/2024 by the High Court of Kogi State by Honourable Justice Isah Abdullahi was made without jurisdiction and it is hereby set aside.
​
I abide by the consequential order as to costs as mine.



29

Appearances:

Chief J. S. Okutepa, SAN, with him, Mr. A. E. Ogwiji, Miss P. I. Amukpo, Mr. K.J. Akomeni, and C. M. Anyanwu, Esq.For Appellant(s)
Mr. A. Adedipe, SAN, with him, Mr. M. Adoyi, M. A. Iruo, Esq. Miss I. I. Egwuelu, Esq. and Mr. V. A. OniFor Respondent(s)
